# [Day 2: Password Philosophy](https://adventofcode.com/2020/day/2)

Your flight departs in a few days from the coastal airport; the easiest way
down to the coast from here is via
[toboggan](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Toboggan).

The shopkeeper at the North Pole Toboggan Rental Shop is having a bad day.
"Something's wrong with our computers; we can't log in!" You ask if you can
take a look.

Their password database seems to be a little corrupted: some of the passwords
wouldn't have been allowed by the Official Toboggan Corporate Policy that was
in effect when they were chosen.

## [Part One](https://adventofcode.com/2020/day/2#part1) - [TypeScript](./typescript/part_one.ts)

To try to debug the problem, they have created a list (your puzzle input) of
**passwords** (according to the corrupted database) and
**the corporate policy when that password was set**.

For example, suppose you have the following list:

```sh
1-3 a: abcde
1-3 b: cdefg
2-9 c: ccccccccc
```

Each line gives the password policy and then the password. The password policy
indicates the lowest and highest number of times a given letter must appear
for the password to be valid. For example, `1-3 a` means that the password
must contain `a` at least `1` time and at most `3` times.

In the above example, **`2`** passwords are valid. The middle password,
`cdefg`, is not; it contains no instances of `b`, but needs at least `1`. The
first and third passwords are valid: they contain one `a` or nine `c`, both
within the limits of their respective policies.

**How many passwords are valid** according to their policies?

Your puzzle answer was `493`.

## [Part Two](https://adventofcode.com/2020/day/2#part2) - [TypeScript](./typescript/part_two.ts)

While it appears you validated the passwords correctly, they don't seem to be
what the Official Toboggan Corporate Authentication System is expecting.

The shopkeeper suddenly realizes that he just accidentally explained the
password policy rules from his old job at the sled rental place down the
street! The Official Toboggan Corporate Policy actually works a little
differently.

Each policy actually describes two **positions in the password**, where `1`
means the first character, `2` means the second character, and so on.
(Be careful; Toboggan Corporate Policies have no concept of "index zero"!)
**Exactly one of these positions** must contain the given letter. Other
occurrences of the letter are irrelevant for the purposes of policy
enforcement.

Given the same example list from above:

- `1-3 a: abcde` is **valid**: position `1` contains `a` and position `3`
  does not.
- `1-3 b: cdefg` is **invalid**: neither position `1` nor position `3`
  contains `b`.
- `2-9 c: ccccccccc` is **invalid**: both position `2` and position `9`
  contain `c`.

**How many passwords are valid** according to the new interpretation of the
policies?

Your puzzle answer was `593`.
